
 Ph.D. in Education Comprehensive Examination Reading List 
(Generals/Program-Wide) 
Last updated: 13 September 2018 
The Program-Wide (Generals) Comprehensive Exam Reading List is composed of two groups of readings: 
1. All required and optional/supplementary readings included in the S800 Proseminar syllabus for the Fall 2017 offering of the course, 
2. Readings that appear on the recently-revised concentration reading lists that were also selected for the revised Generals (Program-wide) reading list (these readings are already indicated in bold on the concentration reading lists) 

For the former, the Fall 2017 S800 Proseminar syllabus is included below and is also available on the course Canvas site. 
For the latter, see immediately below (which is unchanged since this Overlap list was posted on 1 August 2018). 
OVERLAP List 
FROM HDLT: 
Borko, H. (2004). Professional development and teacher learning: Mapping the terrain. Educational Researcher, 33(8), 3-15. 
Bransford, J. & National Research Council Committee on Developments in the Science of Learning. (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and school (Expanded ed.). Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press. (Assigned reading: Chapters 1-5.) 
Bronfenbrenner, U., & Morris, P. A. (2006). The Bioecological Model of Human Development. In R. M. Lerner & W. Damon (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: Theoretical models of human development (pp. 793-828). Hoboken, NJ, US: John Wiley & Sons Inc. 
Bruner, J. (1996). The culture of education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. (Assigned reading: Chapter 9 Psychology’s Next Chapter, pp. 160-186 – but please include also the Notes for that chapter, pp. 208-212). 
Cohen, D. K. (1990). A revolution in one classroom: The case of Mrs. Oublier. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 12(3), 311-329. 
Cuban, L. (1993). How teachers taught: Constancy and change in American classrooms, 1890-1990. New York, NY: Teachers College Press. 
Darling-Hammond, L., Hyler, M. E., Gardner, M. (2017). Effective Teacher Professional Development. Palo Alto, CA: Learning Policy Institute. 
Delpit, L. (1988). The silenced dialogue: Power and pedagogy in educating other people’s children. Harvard Educational Review, 58(3), 280-298. 
Garcia Coll, C., & Lamberty, G. (1996). An integrative model for the study of developmental competencies in minority children. Child Development, 67(5), 1891-1914. 
Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). The weirdest people in the world? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1-23 
Kohlberg, L. & Mayer, R. (1972). Development as the aim of education. Harvard Education Review 1972, 449-496. 
Lampert, M. (1990). When the problem is not the question and the solution is not the answer: Mathematical knowing and teaching. American Educational Research Journal, 27(1), 29-63. 
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. (Assigned reading: Series Forward, Forward by W. F. Hanks, and Chapter 1) 
Lortie, D. (1975). Schoolteacher. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 
Piaget, J. (1970). Science of education and the psychology of the child. New York, NY: Viking Books. 
Shulman, L. S. (1986). Those who understand: Knowledge growth in teaching. Educational Researcher, 15(2), 4-14. 
Snow, C. (2010). Reading comprehension: Reading for learning. In B. McGraw, P. Peterson, & E. Baker (Eds.), The International Encyclopedia of Education (3rd Ed., pp. 413-418). Amersfoort: Elsevier. 
Spelke, E. S. (2000). Core knowledge. American psychologist, 55(11), 1233-1243. 
Sperry, D. D., Sperry, L. L. & Miller, P. J. (2018). Reexamining the Verbal Environments of Children From Different Socioeconomic Backgrounds. Child Development, 1-16. https://doi.org/10.1111/cdev.13072 
Tobias, S., & Duffy, T. M. (Eds.). (2009). Constructivist instruction: Success or failure? (Chapters 1 and 2). New York, NY: Routledge. 
Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., & Moll, H. (2005). Understanding and sharing intentions: The origins of cultural cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28(5), 675-691. 
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Press. (Assigned readings: Chapters 1, 6 and 7). 
FROM CIS: 
Anyon, J. (1980). Social class and the hidden curriculum of work. Journal of education, 67-92. 
Arum, R. (2000). Schools and communities: Ecological and institutional dimensions. Annual Review of Sociology, 26(1), 395-418. 
Bidwell, C. E. (1965). The school as a formal organization. In J. March (Ed.), Handbook of organizations (pp. 972-1022). Chicago, IL: Rand McNally. 
Bourdieu, P., & Passeron, J. C. (1977). Reproduction in education, society and culture. London, England: Sage Publications, 3-68. 
Bryk, A. S., Sebring, P. B., Allensworth, E., Luppescu, S., & Easton, J. Q. (2010). Organizing schools for improvement: Lessons from Chicago. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 
Du Bois, W. E. B., & Marable, M. (2015). Souls of black folk. Routledge. 
Duncan-Andrade, J. M. R., & Morrell, E. (2008). The art of critical pedagogy: Possibilities for moving from theory to practice in urban schools. New York, NY: Peter Lang. Chapters 1 and 2. 
Freire, P. (1968). Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York, NY: Bloomsbury. 
Gandara, P. C., & Contreras, F. (2009). The Latino education crisis: The consequences of failed social policies. Harvard University Press. 
Grubb, N. W., & Lazerson, M. (2004). The education gospel. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Introduction and pp. 1-28. 
hooks, b., 2014. Teaching to transgress. Routledge. 
Lawrence-Lightfoot, S. (1983). The good high school: Portraits of character and culture. New York, NY: Basic Books. Origins and Chapters 2, 4, 7. 
Lipsky, M. (2010). Street-level bureaucracy dilemmas of the individuals in public services, 30th anniversary expanded edition. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation. Preface and, Chapters 1, 2, 8, and 14. 
Lortie, D. (1975). Schoolteacher. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. Chapters 3, 5, 6, 9. 
Omi, M., & Winant, H. (2014). Racial formation in the United States. Routledge. 
Tuck, E. (2009). Suspending damage: A letter to communities. Harvard Educational Review, 79(3), 409-428. 
Tyack, D. (1974). The one best system. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Parts II and III. 
Valenzuela, A. (1999). Subtractive schooling: U.S.-Mexican youth and the politics of caring. Albany: State University of New York Press. Chapters 1, 3, and Appendix. 
Weick, K. (1976). Education organizations as loosely coupled systems. Administrative Science Quarterly, 21(1), 1-19. 
FROM EPPE: 
Becker, G. S. (2009). Human capital: A theoretical and empirical analysis, with special reference to education. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. [Assigned reading: Introduction and Part One.] 
Chubb, J. E. & Moe, T. M. (1990). Politics, markets, and America’s schools. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press. [Assigned reading: Ch. 2.] 
Cohen, D. K. & Mehta, J. D. (2017). Why reform sometimes succeeds: Understanding the conditions that produce reforms that last. American Educational Research Journal, 54(4), 644-690. 
Deming, D., & Figlio, D., (2016). Accountability in U.S. education: Applying lessons from K-12 experience to higher education. Journal of Economic Persspectives, 30(3), 33-55. 
Duncan, G. J. & Murnane, R. J. (Eds.) (2011). Whither opportunity? Rising inequality, schools, and children's life chances. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation. [Assigned reading: Chs. 1, 5 and 6.] 
Elmore, R. (1979). Backward mapping: Implementation research and policy decisions. Political Science Quarterly, 94(4), 601-616. 
Friedman, M. (2002). Capitalism and freedom. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. [Assigned reading: pp. 22-36, 85-107.] 
Ganimian, A. J., & Murnane, R. J. (2016). Improving education in developing countries: Lessons from rigorous impact evaluations. Review of Educational Research, 86(3), 719-755. 
Goldin, C. D. & Katz, L. F. (2009). The race between education and technology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. [Assigned reading for program-wide list: Chs. 1, 2, and 6-8.] 
Hanushek, E. A. (2003). The failure of input‐based schooling policies. Economic Journal, 113(485), F64-F98. 
Hanushek, E. A. & Woessmann, L. W. (2011). The economics of international differences in educational achievement. In E. A. Hanushek, S. Machin, & L. Woessmann, (Eds.) Handbook of the economics of education, Vol. 3 (pp. 89-200). Amsterdam: Elsevier. 
Hirschman, A. O. (1970). Exit, voice, and loyalty: Responses to decline in firms, organizations, and states. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. (Assigned reading: pp. 1-43; 120-126.) 
Jackson, C. K., Rockoff, J. E., & Staiger, D. O. (2014). Teacher effects and teacher-related policies. Annual Review of Economics, 6(1), 801-825. 
Kingdon, J. W. & Thurber, J. A. (1984). Agendas, alternatives, and public policies. Boston: Little, Brown. [Assigned reading: Chs. 1 and 6-8.] 
Koretz, D. (2008). Measuring Up: What educational testing really tells us. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. [Assigned reading: Chs. 1-4 and 9-10.] 
Krueger, A. B. (2003). Economic considerations and class size. Economic Journal, 113(485), F34-F63. 
Reardon, S. F., & Owens, A. (2014). 60 years after Brown: Trends and consequences of school segregation. Annual Review of Sociology, 40, 199-218. 
Weatherley, R., & Lipsky, M. (1977). Street-level bureaucrats and institutional innovation: Implementing special-education reform. Harvard Educational Review, 47(2), 171-197. 
S800 – Ph.D. in Education Proseminar Fall 2017 
Professor Meira Levinson 
Tuesdays/Thursdays 9:30-11:30 am Gutman 303 
Professor Meira Levinson meira_levinson@harvard.edu 
Office Hours: http://levinsonofficehours.wikispaces.com -- or e-mail me directly if you find no compatible times 
Daphne Penn, Teaching Fellow daphnepenn@g.harvard.edu 
Celia Reddick, Teaching Fellow creddick@g.harvard.edu 
Cherise Kenner, Faculty Assistant kennerch@gse.harvard.edu 
Course Description 
This intensive seminar enables first-year Ph.D. in Education students to describe, analyze, and assess key questions, texts, ideas, and intellectual approaches to classic and contemporary educational scholarship. The goal is to provide students an intellectual foundation for their own developing identities and work as researchers within the field of education. We will pay particular attention to the multidisciplinary nature of much educational research, how individual disciplines and theoretical traditions approach educational problems in complementary or contrasting ways, and how educational research functions (or fails to function) at the nexus of policy and practice. The course will also attend to the interaction of the normative and the empirical, bringing to the foreground the role of values in educational research. In addition to mastering a body of collective knowledge and skills, students will have opportunities to connect the intellectual lenses that have been introduced in the seminar to their more specific research questions, and to share their individual expertise with the larger group. 
Course Goals By the end of this course, students will be able to: 
1. Name and discuss a wide variety of key theories and concepts within educational research 
2. Draw upon classic and contemporary texts from a variety of disciplines in order to address key questions in educational research, policy, and practice 
3. Write clear, compelling, short analytic papers that defend an interesting and contestable thesis using evidence synthesized from multiple sources 
4. Place newly-encountered readings, research studies, and research agendas (including their own!) into historical and/or disciplinary context 
5. Analyze, and potentially evaluate, research works in light of their theoretical, disciplinary, methodological, normative, and/or epistemological presuppositions 

Taken together, the above learning goals should enable students to prepare for and write cogent answers to questions on Part A of the General Written Exam. These learning goals are also the only ones that will be assessed and graded. 

6. Discuss a variety of possible (mis)connections and relationships among educational research(ers), policy (makers), and practice (or practitioners), in part in order to start identifying where they wish to position themselves and conduct their own work within this nexus 
7. Identify some faculty at HGSE with whom they want to connect, whether by taking a course, participating in a research apprenticeship, or just showing up at office hours 
8. Affirm their strengths and identify areas for growth as educational researchers-in-training 
9. Identify at least two peers with whom they have formed an intellectually rewarding relationship, as demonstrated (ideally) by collective membership in a writing and/or reading discussion group that lasts through the first year and beyond 

Course Expectations 
Grading: GSAS requires that you take this course for a grade. I am frankly sorry about this. Being a first-semester doctoral student at Harvard is an inherently daunting enterprise, so I wish I could lower the emotional stakes by offering the course credit/no credit. On the other hand, my expectations would be the same regardless, and we (the teaching team) are also 100% committed to helping you to succeed in this course. The outcome will be the same, therefore, as if I were offering it credit/no credit: you will work hard in prosem, and you will end up doing well. 
I expect you to master the course goals, as demonstrated by consistent in-class preparation and participation, satisfactory completion of each assignment, and success on the final exam. A grade of B+ or higher is generally expected of doctoral students, although the real measure will always be your mastery as measured by an assessment guide (rubric), rather than the letter grade. This is because grades are inevitably arbitrary constructs, made even more arbitrary by the frequently different meanings constructed by those who award grades (me), those who receive grades (you), and those who look at your grades (virtually no one for doctoral students aside from fellowship selection and hiring committees, who are themselves far more interested in your research agenda and publications). My best hope of using grades as clear communicative devices is to tie them to meaningful, detailed assessment rubrics. 
Because I construct grades to signal your level of mastery of the learning goals, I do not provide a percentage breakdown of how much each assignment is worth to your overall grade. That would be confusing formative assignments with summative assessment. At the same time, I also do not base your final grade solely on the final exam, as I do not believe that any one task is likely to be a valid or reliable assessment of your mastery of the learning goals. Hence, you can expect me to take into account your performance on all tasks listed below, with a moderate weighting toward later assignments. 
In any case, this is all the anatomy of small differences, as you are all extremely likely to get somewhere between a B+ and A, assuming you put the requisite work into the course, including revising papers as necessary. Our purpose as a teaching team is to help you succeed in your first semester of doctoral study at Harvard, and to set you on a strong path moving forward. We will do so by providing you clear feedback, lots of support, and connections to additional resources if/as needed. Please come speak to me or your TF if you have questions or concerns about any of this. 
Study groups: We strongly, strongly encourage you to form study groups to discuss the reading in advance of class. There is a lot of reading in this class, and much of it will address questions and/or draw on methodological, disciplinary, normative, and epistemological frameworks than you are used to or even interested in. (And they feature a lot of jargon, such as “methodological, disciplinary, normative, and epistemological frameworks.” :-}) Students in the past who have been in study groups have very strongly recommended it. (Just check out the course evaluations if you doubt us!) We will help to facilitate study groups at the beginning of the semester for those who desire it. We also recommend that you find one or more peers with whom to brainstorm writing ideas, trade draft papers, etc. 
General academic expectations and support structures: This is a doctoral-level course. All students will be expected to: read unfamiliar and potentially difficult texts actively and carefully; write clearly and coherently, posing a thesis that is then supported by evidence; apply appropriate writing conventions, usage, and grammar; conduct independent research using a variety of resources in addition to the web; submit original work that credits others when needed. We will support you in mastering these skills via: the on-line analytic writing tutorial, peer supports, accessible office hours, scaffolded assignments, and formative feedback. 
If you need additional assistance in any of these areas, please consult with the librarians in Gutman. They offer training in library research, individual academic writing consultations, help with academic citation practices, and many other services. (You can find a list of the academic support they provide in MyGSE under Gutman Library.) The Academic Writing Center in Gutman is a tremendous resource, as is Harvard’s Bureau of Study Council, which provides tutoring and many other academic support services. There is no shame in reaching out to any of these individuals or institutions for help! I regularly refer even my strongest doctoral students to the Writing Center and Bureau of Study Council for support; after all, that is why these services exist, to support your learning. 
With respect to the issue of academic originality and appropriate citation of others, make sure to read the section of the Student Handbook that details HGSE’s policy on plagiarism. You are reminded that students who submit work that is not their own and does not clearly cite the original source(s) will be dismissed from HGSE. 
Okay, all that being said, now on to the specific course requirements. 
You must meet the following expectations/complete the following assignments in order to pass this class: 
Daily attendance and responsible class participation: We expect you to attend all classes, on time and in full, and to participate appropriately. Responsible class participation—meaning both listening actively to others and offering your own ideas on a regular basis without hogging airtime and without checking out electronically (e.g. via FB) or physically (e.g. leaving class) —matters because it helps both you and your peers master the material and meet the course goals. Each unit will offer a number of opportunities as well as a wide variety of ways to participate: thinking, writing, talking, presenting, doing, solving, teaching, etc., individually, in small groups, and with the whole class. If you are having a hard time finding your niche and participating in class appropriately, please talk to a member of the teaching team as soon as possible. 
Daily readings: Please complete all assigned readings/texts before coming to class, and bring them with you to class (whether in hard copy or electronically). Read “actively” – i.e., highlight 
the text, take notes, write marginal comments and flag important passages with sticky notes, talk with others about the material, ask questions, draw connections, etc. in order to comprehend and process the readings before class begins. One of the central activities within the seminar will be to discuss the assigned texts carefully and critically; you will hence be expected to point to specific evidence within the texts in order to support your claims. See the course website for the link to an on-line Analytic Reading and Writing tutorial that provides further guidance. 
You should note that I systematically constructed the syllabus to include a number of texts from the Generals reading list. This is your opportunity to discuss these readings with faculty and peers in a structured and supported way. 
Brief weekly feedback: We ask that you let us know what you’re thinking about after class once per week. Our expectation is that you will write only a couple of lines, although you’re welcome to write more if you wish. You may mention: a question that’s on your mind; an issue you want to probe more deeply yourself, or that you wished we had probed more deeply in class; an idea you’re excited about; a frustration you had; something you’re confused about; a suggestion; what you wish you had thought of and said in class; something someone said that disturbed or excited you; etc. Your responses will be ungraded, but extremely helpful as we try to keep track of and stay responsive to what you and your classmates are thinking and learning. You will receive a survey prompt via e-mail each week on Thursday afternoon, which we ask that you respond to by Saturday at noon. You have the option to mark your response “private” if you wish; we will share private responses only among the teaching team, while all other responses will be included in an anonymized digest on the course website, as it is often quite helpful to students to see how your peers are thinking about course materials, methods, etc. 
Seminar leadership: You and two partners (or in one case, three partners) will be responsible for leading one class session during the semester. The sessions designated for student leadership are identified in green below. You will be able to indicate your top 3 choices in response to a survey after the first class session; we will let you know what day you’ve been assigned by the end of the second week of class. To prepare for the seminar, you will need to draft a full lesson plan (we can provide guidance/models if you do not have experience writing lesson plans, although we will try to ensure that your team includes someone with teaching experience), meet with either Celia or Daphne to discuss your plan, and then revise accordingly before you teach. Your seminar leadership will thus be heavily supported so we make sure that all students learn from your session; at the same time, however, you will have wide latitude in how you plan the class. Note that given the necessary advance lesson planning and the challenges of coordinating with other group members, you should plan to do the readings for the class that you’re teaching at least two weeks ahead of time. This will give your group sufficient lead time to then discuss the readings, develop a lesson plan, meet with Daphne or Celia, and then revise the plan and get final materials together. Finally, your group will debrief the seminar with Meira and one or both TFs, ideally at 9 am the class day following the one you teach (so if you lead seminar on Thursday, you would meet to debrief at 9 am the following Tuesday), although we recognize that some students take language classes or have domestic or other responsibilities that require us to find another time. 
Analytic paper: You are responsible for writing and revising in response to instructor feedback one 1500-1800 word analytic paper (about 5-6 pages double-spaced, normal margins and font). Note that word count is strictly monitored; we will not read papers longer than 1800 words. The paper should analyze 2-3 readings from one class between Sep. 5 and Oct. 3 in light of some 
aspect of the framing questions for that class day or unit. We will post a GoogleDoc the first day of class so you can sign up for your preferred class session (which cannot also be the session you’re teaching). If all slots are full for a particular day/topic, however, you will need to select a different day so we spread student expertise throughout the first two units. Papers are due at 5 p.m. the day after the class you are writing about. (So if, for example, you write a paper drawing on Freire and Noddings for Sep. 12’s “critical perspectives” on the aims of education class, then you would submit it by 5 p.m. on Sep. 13.) 
This paper is designed to: (1) help you think more deeply about one of the topics during the semester; (2) seed each class with people who have thought especially carefully about the readings for that day; (3) enable us to assess and give you formative feedback on your analytic writing; (4) model constructive criticism among professional researchers and colleagues; (5) enable you to deepen and sharpen your ideas through revising your work; (6) give you practice responding to revise and resubmit (R&R) feedback from a journal. 
To achieve aims 3-6, we will provide you careful and comprehensive feedback on your paper within 10 days of your original submission. Note that this is likely to be more rigorous feedback than you are used to receiving: you may well get more comments, and more critical comments, than you’ve gotten in the past. Please don’t despair! Treat it as a formative learning opportunity (which is its purpose), rather than a summative judgment about your skills, knowledge, or worth as a scholar or person (which is not at all the point, and would be totally invalid anyway). You will then have an additional 10 days to revise and resubmit your paper, along w/a brief covering memo indicating why/how you chose to change your paper, and in particular why you chose not to follow recommendations for revision (always important for journal editors on an R&R; you can openly disagree with reviewers, but you can’t ignore them). We will read your revised paper and provide you brief summative commentary. 
The rubric that we will use to evaluate your writing is posted on the “Writing Assignments” tab of the course website. The on-line Analytic Reading and Writing Tutorial will also prove helpful to many of you. In addition, we will try to post some exemplar analysis papers with marginal comments and accompanying rubrics. We will discuss these resources and assessment procedures the first day of class. 
Please note that your initial paper submission should not be a first or “rough” draft. Just as you would if you were submitting a journal article, you should do your best work prior to initial submission, including sharing outlines or drafts with writing group partners, and carefully revising and editing your work. The point is to get feedback on your best possible writing—which inevitably will then lead to a further round of revision. 
Second paper: For this assignment, you may choose among three options: (1) write an analytic paper about any 2-3 texts in Unit 3 or 4; (2) write a paper that connects what you are learning in Prosem with your own research interests; (3) write a paper that integrates your learning across Prosem and one or more of your methods courses. The specific prompts/instructions will be posted on Canvas by October 15. In either case, the paper will be 1500-1800 words, with a clear argument supported by evidence. It is due by 5 pm on Friday, Nov. 10. 
Final exam: I assign a final exam for this course because one of its chief goals (as indicated by Course Goals 1-5, above) is to help you prepare for Part A of the General Written Exam. In order to help both you and us assess whether the course has been successful in this regard, it makes most sense to have the summative assessment be in the form of a mini-general exam. Hence, you 
will receive a take-home exam at 9 a.m. on Tuesday, December 5. It will be due by 5 p.m. on Monday, December 11. Although we are giving you a week to complete it, our intent is that it will take you no more than 15 hours of work in total, and quite possibly less (it depends on how quickly you write!). 
Summary of Requirements and Due Dates: 
Read, participate in class, and send brief feedback every week 
With 2-3 partners, plan and lead seminar once this semester. 
Write and revise 1500-1800 word analytic paper once between Sep. 5 – Oct. 3. Paper due 5 p.m. the day after the relevant class; R&R due 10 days after you receive our feedback. 
Write a 1500-1800 word analytic paper analyzing course texts or connecting them to your research agenda. Due 5 pm on Nov. 10. 
Take final exam, released at 9 a.m. on Dec. 5 and due by 5 p.m. on Dec. 11. 
Seminar leadership slot and analytic paper slot will be scheduled via survey from TFs after first day of class. 
Required Texts (available at the Coop; Lareau available online but it’s annoying to access because the library limits the number of simultaneous readers; also on reserve in Gutman) 
Lareau, Annette (2011). Unequal Childhoods: Class, Race, and Family Life, 2nd Edition. University of California Press. [Make sure to get the 2nd edition!] Or if you like to read digitally, there’s a free (to Harvard) copy available online through EBSCO. See LINK 
Mehta, Jal, Robert Schwartz, and Frederick Hess, eds. (2012). The Futures of School Reform. Harvard Education Press. [Note that if you buy this from the Harvard Ed Press office on Story Street, you can get the book for 20% off. I therefore have not asked the Coop to stock it.] 
Valenzuela, Angela (1999). Subtractive Schooling: U.S. Mexican Youth and the Politics of Caring. SUNY Press. 
All other readings will be available under the iPa© tab on the course website (for book chapters), via Hollis (for articles), or in some cases online via link embedded in syllabus. 
Outline of Syllabus 
Welcome/Intro 
UNIT I. WHAT SHOULD EDUCATION AIM TO ACHIEVE? WHAT SHOULD PEOPLE LEARN? 
Vocational Perspectives 
Civic Perspectives 
Critical Perspectives 
Faculty Panel: How do you measure what matters—or make what matters measurable? 
Consolidation Day 
UNIT II. HOW, WHEN, WHERE, AND WHY DOES LEARNING HAPPEN—AND HOW DOES IT RELATE TO FORMAL EDUCATION? 
Cognitive Perspectives 
Ecological, Cultural, and Social Perspectives 
Teachers’ Roles 
Schools’ Roles 
Faculty Panel: How, where, and why do you look for learning—and how do you know when you’ve found it, or what to do as a result? 
Consolidation Day 
UNIT III. WHAT ACCOUNTS FOR DIFFERENCES IN STUDENTS’ LEARNING AND IN THEIR EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES? HOW ARE THESE DIFFERENCES CONSTRUCTED, REINFORCED, AND/OR OVERCOME? 
Families 1: Economic and Intellectual Capital 
Families 2: Social and Cultural Capital 
Institutions 1: Policy (Hartford case study) 
Institutions 2: Practice (Seguín case study) 
Measuring and Assessing Inequality 
Faculty Panel: How do you understand and research inequality, and why? 
Consolidation Day 
UNIT IV. HOW CAN EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES BE IMPROVED? WHAT OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES FACE THOSE WHO ATTEMPT—VIA RESEARCH, POLICY, OR PRACTICE—TO EFFECT EDUCATIONAL CHANGE? 
Control vs. Autonomy 1: Teachers and Curriculum 
Control vs. Autonomy 2: Professionals and Parents 
Inside vs. Outside Schools 
Reforming Policies and Practices vs. Reforming Learning 
Learning vs. Schooling 
Faculty panel: How do you bridge the gaps among research, policy, and action? 
Wrap-up 
Detailed Topics and Readings 8-31 
Welcome and Introduction 
How have different educational aims, policies, and practices been connected in theory, but perhaps disconnected in practice, over time? Why is there simultaneously so much variation and so much stasis, according to Cohen? Methodologically, how does Cohen make his argument: what sources and kinds of evidence does he draw on, and how does he deploy and analyze them to further his claims? How does this article reinforce and/or challenge your own ideas about educational research, policy, or practice? 
Cohen, David. 1988. “Teaching: Plus Ça Change,” link. 
Levinson, Meira, Sherry Deckman, and Laurel Stolte. “Analytic Reading and Writing Tutorial,” Slides 1-23, link. 
9-5 
Unit I: What should education aim to achieve? What should people learn? 
Vocational perspectives 
How have vocational aims both implicitly and explicitly shaped educational curricula, pedagogies, and policy in the past and present? Who is potentially served by schools’ focus on educating individuals for economic success, and who is potentially harmed? How can we make sense of the various and even competing answers to these questions provided by different theoretical and empirical approaches? 
Vocationalism: Grubb, Norton W. and Lazerson, M. (2004). The Education Gospel. Harvard University Press. Introduction, pp. 1-28. [iPa©] 
Non-cognitive skills as vocationally powerful: Tough, Paul (2012). How Children Succeed: Grit, Curiosity, and the Hidden Power of Character. Houghton, Mifflin, Harcourt. Ch. 2, pp. 49-105. [iPa©] 
Social Reproduction: Bowles, Samuel and Herbert Gintis (1976). Schooling in Capitalist America. Basic Books, pp. 3-17, 125-148. [iPa©] 
9-7 
Civic perspectives 
How can education strengthen communal life and democratic participation? To what extent are civic goals of education supportive of, unrelated to, or in conflict with goals for individual flourishing? What policies and practices would we see in a system that was serious about the civic aims of education, and how does this compare to educational policies and practices today? 
Community Membership and Social Progress: Dewey, John (1907). The School and Society. University of Chicago Press. Ch.1, pp. 3-28. [iPa©] 
Opportunity, Creative Understanding, and Contribution: Gutmann. Amy (2015). “What Makes a University Education Worthwhile?” In Harry Brighouse and Michael McPherson, The Aims of Higher Education. University of Chicago Press, Ch. 2, pp. 7-25. [iPa©] 
Civic Equality: Levinson, Meira (2012). No Citizen Left Behind. Harvard University Press. Ch. 1, pp. 23-59. [iPa©] 
